               MOBILITY + COMMUNITIES + ENVIRONMENT + ECONOMY




SB 79
Mapping
Approach and
Methodology
July 2, 2026
SB 79 Mapping Approach and Methodology                                                                  July 2026




Table of Contents
Background .................................................................................................. 1

Approach ...................................................................................................... 2

SB 79 Mapping Terms ................................................................................. 3

Map Updates ................................................................................................ 8




                                                        i
SB 79 Mapping Approach and Methodology                                                            July 2026




Background
On October 10, 2025, Governor Newsom signed Senate Bill 79 (SB 79), the Abundant and Affordable
Homes Near Transit Act, into law. Authored by Senator Scott Wiener (D–San Francisco), the bill establishes
statewide standards to streamline housing development near transit by defining and mapping Transit
Oriented Development (TOD) zones and stops. SB 79 aims to accelerate transit-oriented housing
production by making qualifying projects an allowed use on sites zoned for residential, mixed-use, or
commercial development if the project meets applicable requirements.

The law becomes operative July 1, 2026, unless a local agency adopts a TOD ordinance or a TOD
alternative plan deemed compliant by the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
before that date or secures deferred effectuation. For unincorporated areas, the provisions apply
beginning with the planning of the 7th Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) cycle.

The legislation requires that Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs), like SCAG, develop and
maintain a map identifying and classifying Tier 1 and Tier 2 TOD zones around major transit stops. The
statute provides that the MPO map should be prepared in accordance with the guidance prepared by the
California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). The statute also states that the
map carries a rebuttable presumption of validity for use by project applicants and local governments.

SCAG engaged with other affected MPOs and the HCD regarding interpretation of key statutory terms
relevant to the MPO mapping assignment. The HCD provided the SB 79 Advisory Clarifications on
Definitions (HCD Clarifications) on March 20, 2026.




                                                    1
SB 79 Mapping Approach and Methodology                                                          May 2026




Approach
SCAG’s approach to map development is focused on providing clear and transparent assumptions and
processes that meet SCAG’s mapping obligation in the statute and provide affected jurisdictions and
other stakeholders with the necessary information to inform local land use decisions. SCAG’s mapping
approach was informed by:

    •   SB 79 statute
    •   HCD Clarifications
    •   SCAG’s technical interpretation of statute where HCD guidance was broad or lacked clarity

The following outlines the key terms that informed map development and how SCAG staff arrived at a
recommended approach to produce the map.




                                                   2
SB 79 Mapping Approach and Methodology                                                                    May 2026




SB 79 Mapping Terms
Urban Transit County
The first step in assessing SB 79 eligibility is to identify eligible urban transit counties. The statute defines
urban transit counties as counties with more than 15 passenger rail stations. SB 79 does not indicate
whether those passenger rail stations are required to be operational or whether planned stations count
towards the 15 stations.

THE HCD CLARIFICATIONS STATE THAT:
a passenger rail station includes all forms of public heavy rail, light rail, or commuter rail stations that are in
active operation and provide regular service. A passenger rail station does not include planned rail stations
that are not yet in service. A passenger rail station occupying one physical location counts as a single
station, even if multiple rail services utilize the station.

SCAG Applicability: As of June 2026, Los Angeles County is the only urban transit county in the SCAG
region. Orange County is anticipated to qualify as an urban transit county when the OC Streetcar opens
for revenue service, subject to confirmation that the county then has more than 15 qualifying passenger
rail stations under SB 79 and HCD’s Clarifications. Future transit extensions and projects throughout the
SCAG region will continue to be evaluated to determine whether additional counties may qualify as urban
transit counties in the future.

Once an urban transit county is identified, major transit stops need to be evaluated to assess whether
they qualify as TOD stops under the SB 79 statute.

TOD Stops (Tier 1 and Tier 2) and TOD Zones
SB 79 applicability is determined by the transit service type and level of frequency within an urban transit
county.

TOD stops are major transit stops as defined by Section 21064.3 of the Public Resources Code, and also
include stops on a route for which a preferred alternative has been selected or which are identified in a
regional transportation improvement program, that is served by heavy rail transit, very high frequency
commuter rail, high frequency commuter rail, light rail transit, or bus service within an urban transit
county meeting the standards of paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 21060.2 of the Public
Resources Code.

The statute includes two different tiers of TOD stops, each with distinct transit service characteristics and
corresponding allowable development intensities.

To qualify as a Tier 1 TOD stop, a major transit stop must be served by heavy rail or by very high-
frequency commuter rail (72 daily trains across both directions).

To qualify as a Tier 2 TOD stop, a major transit stop must be served by light rail, high frequency commuter
rail (48 daily trains across both directions), or bus service meeting the standards of paragraph (1) of
subdivision (a) of Section 21060.2 of the Public Resources Code.




                                                         3
SB 79 Mapping Approach and Methodology                                                             May 2026




PLANNED TRANSIT PROJECTS
As noted in the TOD stop definition above, the statute encompasses planned projects (meaning transit
projects that are not yet constructed or operational). This is inclusive of projects for which a locally
preferred alternative has been selected or those identified in a regional transportation improvement
program.

On environmental clearance, the HCD Clarifications published on March 22, 2026 note:

    •   Selected preferred alternative route stops from an adopted CEQA/NEPA document, an adopted
        locally preferred alternative (LPA), or other local implementing document as determined by the
        MPO, regardless of their status in a federally or state mandated TIP.

For projects with funding in the transportation improvement program, the HCD Clarifications note:

    •   An existing or planned transit station or stop identified in a region’s federally or state-mandated
        transportation improvement program (TIP) that is served by any of the following: light rail or heavy
        rail, high-frequency or very high-frequency commuter rail, or eligible bus service (see also “Bus
        Service”). Planned TOD stops in a region’s TIP may be limited to include only those with any amount
        of committed construction funding.

HCD provided additional initial direction to SCAG on June 22, 2026, indicating that, upon further review,
the SB 79 map should include projects with a locally preferred alternative and should not be limited to
those projects with full environmental clearance. SCAG has revised this methodology to reflect this
direction

SCAG Applicability: Based on discussions with HCD and the HCD Clarifications published on March 22,
2026, SCAG’s approach to planned projects was to map planned TOD stops where the station or stop
location has sufficient certainly for regional mapping purposes. For purposes of the SB 79 map, SCAG’s
approach was to treat a planned project as having sufficient certainty where the project has completed
full environmental clearance under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and, when required,
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). However, based on the additional initial direction received
from HCD, SCAG’s approach to planned projects will be to map planned TOD stops where a locally
preferred alternative has been selected, and will not require full environmental clearance. This adjustment
will be implemented on the SB 79 map once official clarification has been received from HCD.

Additionally, SCAG will map projects identified in the Federal Transportation Improvement Program (FTIP)
only when they include committed construction funding. This approach ensures that there is a greater
degree of certainty that the project will be constructed.

TOD ZONES
Although SB 79 specifies a one-half-mile radius for defining TOD zones, SCAG will enhance this approach
by mapping around each qualifying TOD stop three distinct buffer areas as identified in SB 79: a 200-foot
buffer, a quarter-mile buffer, and a half-mile buffer. Multiple buffers allow for a more nuanced
understanding of the built environment and potential development intensity surrounding each stop. By
displaying multiple buffers, SCAG’s TOD map will provide planners, jurisdictions, and stakeholders with a
clearer spatial framework for assessing housing and land use opportunities consistent with SB 79
objectives. Furthermore, if a zone buffer intersects a parcel, the entire parcel shall be considered within
the zone for development under SB 79.




                                                     4
SB 79 Mapping Approach and Methodology                                                                May 2026



The SB 79 statue includes provisions that radius beyond the ¼ mile does not apply to cities with less than
35,000 people. As such, the SCAG region SB 79 map will only include the 200 foot buffer and the ¼ mile
buffer for cities that have a population under 35,000.

COMMUTER RAIL
Under SB 79 and HCD’s Clarifications, Metrolink and Amtrak Pacific Surfliner are recognized as commuter
rail systems, and stations within their service network will be included in the SB 79 map when they meet
the required weekday service frequency threshold for qualifying Tier 1 or Tier 2 transit stops. SCAG
understands that SB 79’s exemption of long-distance routes applies only to services such as the Amtrak
Southwest Chief or Amtrak Sunset Limited, which traverse multiple states.

Commuter Rail Service Frequency
To determine which stations qualify under SB 79, a “day” is defined as a typical weekday service day.
Overall frequency of commuter rail service is calculated at the station level, rather than at the line or
system-wide level, to more accurately reflect the actual level of service available to each station area.

When defining high frequency or very high frequency commuter rail, the statute defines this as a
commuter rail service and specifies how many trains must be operated at the station to meet the
definition of high or very high commuter rail service.

The HCD Clarifications state, “In assessing whether a station meets this threshold, frequency is based on the
total number of trains serving the station, including trains operated by multiple commuter rail services
where applicable. This approach reflects the overall level of transit access and frequency experienced by
riders at a given stop.”

SCAG Applicability: SCAG’s evaluation of commuter rail service frequency when calculating whether a
station qualifies as a Tier 1 or Tier 2 station is that the statute is focused on counting a commuter rail
service at a station, whereas the HCD Clarification expands the analysis to account for every train serving a
station. This increases the train frequency that can be counted and increases the number of Tier 1 and Tier
2 stations that qualify under SB 79.

SCAG’s interpretation of how to account for frequency is in line with the statute as written and is that
frequency is calculated at the station level for a single service or line, not aggregated across multiple
services at the station level.

However, given HCD Clarifications that expand this, the SCAG map complies with the HCD Clarifications
and identifies stations that are affected by the HCD Clarification and includes a note explaining the
difference between the statute and HCD Clarifications. Given that land use decisions are local
determinations, impacted jurisdictions in the SCAG region will need to evaluate this distinction and make
the final determination as to whether they will account for cumulative service at a station or if they will
only account for one line at the station level. This approach is intended to preserve transparency for
affected jurisdictions, project applicants, and the HCD while maintaining the map’s function as the
regional SB 79 mapping resource with a rebuttable presumption of validity.

HEAVY AND LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT
SB 79 defines heavy rail transit as a public electric railway line with the capacity for a heavy volume of
traffic using high-speed and rapid acceleration passenger rail cars operating singly or in multicar trains on
fixed rails, separate rights-of-way from which all other vehicular and foot traffic are excluded, and high



                                                      5
SB 79 Mapping Approach and Methodology                                                                 May 2026



platform loading. Heavy rail transit does not include California High-Speed Rail. Light rail transit includes
streetcar, trolley, and tramway service. Light rail transit does not include airport people movers.

SCAG Applicability: For the purposes of SB 79 implementation, LA Metro’s B and D Lines are heavy rail
transit, consistent with their grade-separated operation and service characteristics. All other Metro rail
lines are light rail transit, including the C Line, which—despite operating primarily within its own right-of-
way—does not meet the criteria for heavy rail classification. Additionally, the OC Streetcar will be
recognized as a qualifying light rail transit service, given its fixed-guideway operation and alignment with
light rail service standards; however, its inclusion is contingent upon the system opening for revenue
service.

BUS SERVICE
SB 79 considers two types of bus stops: a Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) station and the intersection of two or
more major bus routes with a frequency of service interval of 20 minutes or less during the morning and
afternoon peak commute periods (Section 21064.3 of the Public Resources Code). In either case, to be
eligible as a TOD stop, SB 79 requires full-time dedicated bus lanes or operation in a separate right-of-
way dedicated for public transportation with a frequency of service interval of 15 minutes or less during
the morning and afternoon peak commute periods (paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 21060.2 of
the Public Resources Code).

BRT is defined in Section 21060.2 of the Public Resources Code:

    a) “Bus rapid transit” means a public mass transit service provided by a public agency or by a public-
       private partnership that includes all of the following features:
           1. Full-time dedicated bus lanes or operation in a separate right-of-way dedicated for public
                transportation with a frequency of service interval of 15 minutes or less during the
                morning and afternoon peak commute periods.
           2. Transit signal priority.
           3. All-door boarding.
           4. Fare collection system that promotes efficiency.
           5. Defined stations.
    b) “Bus rapid transit station” means a clearly defined bus station served by a bus rapid transit.

The HCD Clarifications note that a qualifying bus service TOD stop is a location where the bus stop is
adjacent to a full-time dedicated transit lane and the average bus service intervals across the combined
morning and afternoon peak periods is 15 minutes or less.

SCAG Applicability: For BRT services, such as the Metro G Line, that meet the definition in Section
21060.2 of the Public Resources Code, all associated BRT stops adjacent to a full-time dedicated bus lane
are included.

For bus service not meeting the full definition of BRT, full-time dedicated bus lane segments were
identified in coordination with transit agencies and local jurisdictions for consideration in this analysis. The
dedicated lane segments must be adjacent to the stop but are not required to be continuous between
stops. Bus service eligibility and stop inclusion were further evaluated by determining bus frequencies,
which were calculated by route and direction to identify major transit stops on these segments. Each
major transit stop was checked against the major transit stops identified by Cal-ITP. The major transit
stops adjacent to a full-time dedicated bus lane and with service frequencies of 15 minutes or less during
the morning and afternoon peak commute periods are included in the SB 79 map, provided they also met




                                                       6
SB 79 Mapping Approach and Methodology                                                                May 2026



the Major Transit Stop criteria through an intersecting major bus route operating at headways of 20
minutes or less.

When defining the ‘adjacency’ of a dedicated lane, SCAG includes dedicated lanes that are directly at the
bus stop and those located across the intersection. However, in instances where a dedicated lane is not at
a bus stop and starts or ends a block or more away, the stop will not be counted as a TOD stop under SB
79. Additionally, dedicated bus lanes that allow bicycles and/or right-turn vehicular lanes are still
considered dedicated lanes.

PEDESTRIAN ACCESS POINT
While SB 79 does not define a pedestrian access point, it requires that the distance of a transit-oriented
housing development project from a TOD stop shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest edge
of the parcel containing the proposed project to a pedestrian access point for the TOD stop.

The HCD Clarifications state that a pedestrian access point is any applicable station entrance, boarding
platform access point, or location of a transit stop as defined and depicted on the applicable MPO SB 79
map. MPOs may rely on General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS) data, if provided by individual transit
providers within each region, and may add additional pedestrian access points for TOD stops with multiple
entrances.

SCAG Applicability: For the purposes of SB 79 implementation, a pedestrian access point is the primary
location where pedestrians enter a transit station or boarding platform and is used to determine the 200-
foot, quarter-mile, and half-mile zones.

In general, the pedestrian access point corresponds to the official stop or station location contained in
transit agency-provided geospatial datasets, including GTFS data for existing stops and validated
shapefiles for planned stops. Because these datasets are vetted and validated by the transit operators,
SCAG utilizes the geocoded points contained in the shapefile or GTFS data to represent the official,
agency-approved station locations and access points.

Note the following resources for GTFS data:

    •   LA Metro GTFS
    •   LADOT GTFS
    •   Metrolink GTFS
    •   Santa Monica Big Blue Bus GTFS

GTFS data points are typically represented by a ‘0’ which represents the station location/the platform and
a ‘2’ which represents access points to a station including but not limited to elevators, escalators, and
stairs.

When both a ‘0’ (station/platform) and ‘2’ (access points) are available, SCAG will utilize the ‘2’ point and
remove the ‘0’ and will not modify and any of the ‘2’ points included in the GTFS data. However, when a
‘0’ is the only point available for planned projects, SCAG will utilize this information except for
circumstances when a project is operational or when a planned project has construction drawings with
sufficient level of detailed identified by transit operator. In these circumstances, SCAG will work with the
transit operator to map the access points and pass the latitude and longitudinal points for future GTFS
utilization.




                                                      7
SB 79 Mapping Approach and Methodology                                                               May 2026



For planned projects that do not have detailed drawings, SCAG will identify a point at the center of the
platform or bus stop identified by the transit agency.

Given adjusted direction from HCD on planned projects with an LPA, the pedestrian access points for
these projects will be developed in close coordination with transit operator and will include either the
center point of platform or the nearest street intersection, based on data availability, with the goal of
siting them as close to the future station as possible.




Map Updates
SCAG will update the SB 79 map on an annual basis and when a county becomes an urban transit county.
The annual updates will account for updated GTFS data, when an eligible transit project secures an LPA, and
when an eligible transit project secures committed construction funding in the FTIP.

Given that SCAG is not the originator of the SB 79 mapping data, annual updates will require collaboration
from applicable jurisdictions and transit operators to collect data on transit corridor project status, bus
service and commuter rail frequency, and information on dedicated lanes, and similar.

SB 79 provides that when a new transit route or extension is planned that was not identified in the
applicable regional transportation plan on or before January 1, 2026, those stops shall not be eligible as
TOD stops unless they would be eligible as Tier 1 TOD stops. Further, if a county becomes an urban transit
county subsequent to July 1, 2026, then bus service in that county shall remain ineligible for designation
of a TOD stop.




                                                      8
MAIN OFFICE

LOS ANGELES COUNTY
900 Wilshire Blvd., Ste. 1700
Los Angeles, CA 90017
Tel: (213) 236-1800
www.scag.ca.gov



REGIONAL OFFICES

IMPERIAL COUNTY
1503 N. Imperial Ave., Ste. 104
El Centro, CA 92243
Tel: (213) 236-1967

INLAND EMPIRE
3403 10th St., Ste. 805
Riverside, CA 92501
Tel: (951) 784-1513
ORANGE COUNTY
OCTA Building
600 S. Main St., Ste. 1108
Orange, CA 92868
Tel: (213) 630-1599

VENTURA COUNTY
4001 Mission Oaks Blvd., Ste. L
Camarillo, CA 93012
Tel: (213) 236-1960
                                  26-417-MMI-0395-SB79.2026.07.06
